docs(data-masking): add docs for data masking utility (#3186)
awslabs/aws-lambda-powertools-python: docs/utilities/data_masking.md

Reviewer: Please add a new section in the `mkdocs.yaml` file.

Like this:
![image](https://github.com/aws-powertools/powertools-lambda-python/assets/4295173/36c7063e-e3f1-41aa-a881-6e36159f2f8b)

---

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD051 -->

The data masking utility can encrypt, decrypt, or irreversibly mask sensitive information to protect data confidentiality.

```mermaid
stateDiagram-v2
    direction LR
    LambdaFn: Your Lambda function
    DataMasking: DataMasking
    Operation: Possible operations
    Input: Sensitive value
    Mask: <strong>Mask</strong>
    Encrypt: <strong>Encrypt</strong>
    Decrypt: <strong>Decrypt</strong>
    Provider: Encryption provider
    Result: Data transformed <i>(masked, encrypted, or decrypted)</i>

    LambdaFn --> DataMasking
    DataMasking --> Operation

    state Operation {
        [*] --> Input
        Input --> Mask: Irreversible
        Input --> Encrypt
        Input --> Decrypt
        Encrypt --> Provider
        Decrypt --> Provider
    }

    Operation --> Result
```

## Key features

* Encrypt, decrypt, or irreversibly mask data with ease
* Remove sensitive information in one or more fields within nested data
* Seamless integration with [AWS Encryption SDK](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/encryption-sdk/latest/developer-guide/introduction.html){target="_blank"} for industry and AWS security best practices

## Terminology

> **Masking** replaces sensitive information **irreversibly** with a non-sensitive placeholder _(`*****`)_. It replaces data in-memory, hence why being irreversible.

Reviewer 2: We need to change the language here from "irreversibly" to something else, I think the word probably isn't accessible to some ESL speakers.

Reviewer 2: This sentence probably needs rewriting, it doesn't seem right to me for some reason.
> **Masking** is the act of replacing information with a non-sensitive placeholder _(`*****`)_, this operation is done in memory making it a one-way action

**[Encrypted message](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/encryption-sdk/latest/developer-guide/message-format.html){target="_blank"}** is a portable data structure that includes encrypted data along with copies of the encrypted data key. It includes everything Encryption SDK needs to validate authenticity, integrity, and to decrypt with the right master key.

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD013 -->
**[Envelope encryption](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/encryption-sdk/latest/developer-guide/concepts.html#envelope-encryption){target="_blank"}** uses two different keys to encrypt data safely: master and data key. The data key encrypts the plaintext, and the master key encrypts the data key. It simplifies key management _(you own the master key)_, isolates compromises to data key, and scales better with large data volumes.
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD013 -->

<center>
```mermaid
graph LR
    M(Master key) --> |Encrypts| D(Data key)
    D(Data key) --> |Encrypts| S(Sensitive data)
```
<i>Envelope encryption visualized.</i>
</center>

> ## Getting started

Reviewer 2: We should link to either an encryption 101 doc or something to help people understand the concept if they're not familiar, this jumps to L400 quite quickly

To decrypt, you will need an [encryption provider](#providers). Here, we will use `AWSEncryptionSDKProvider`.

Under the hood, we delegate a [number of operations](#decrypt-operation-with-encryption-sdk-kms) to AWS Encryption SDK to verify authentication, integrity, and actual ciphertext decryption.

=== "getting_started_decrypt_data.py"

    **NOTE**. Decryption only works with KMS Key ARN.

    ```python hl_lines="6-7 12-13 24"
    --8<-- "examples/data_masking/src/getting_started_decrypt_data.py"
    ```

    1. Note that KMS key alias or key ID won't work.
    2. You can use more than one KMS Key for higher availability but increased latency. </br></br>Encryption SDK will call `Decrypt` API with all master keys when trying to decrypt the data key.
    3. See [working with nested data](#working-with-nested-data) to learn more about the `fields` parameter.

=== "encrypt_data_output.json"

    ```json hl_lines="5-7 12"
    --8<-- "examples/data_masking/src/encrypt_data_output.json"
    ```

=== "getting_started_decrypt_data_output.json"

    ```json hl_lines="5-7 12-17"
    --8<-- "examples/data_masking/src/getting_started_decrypt_data_output.json"
    ```

> ### Encryption context for integrity and authenticity

Reviewer 2: this section should link to something talking about the confused deputy issue, there's probably a good 3rd party source we can link to.

It can help explain why AAD is a good idea

Author: I don't think AAD (the encryption context in this case) will help to prevent the confused deputy issue here right? Won't only proper authentication and authorization prevent that, especially since the encryption context is plaintext?

    ```json
    --8<-- "examples/data_masking/src/choosing_payload_simple_json.json"
    ```

=== "Result"

    ```json
    --8<-- "examples/data_masking/src/choosing_payload_simple_json_output.json"
    ```

## Advanced

### Data serialization

???+ note "Current limitations"
    1. Python classes, `Dataclasses`, and `Pydantic models` are not supported yet.

Before we traverse the data structure, we perform two important operations on input data:

1. If `JSON string`, **deserialize** using default or provided deserializer.
2. If `dictionary`, **normalize** into `JSON` to prevent traversing unsupported data types.

When decrypting, we revert the operation to restore the original data structure.

For compatibility or performance, you can optionally pass your own JSON serializer and deserializer to replace `json.dumps` and `json.loads` respectively:

=== "advanced_custom_serializer.py"

    ```python hl_lines="16"
    --8<-- "examples/data_masking/src/advanced_custom_serializer.py"
    ```

### Providers

#### AWS Encryption SDK

You can modify the following values when initializing the `AWSEncryptionSDKProvider` to best accommodate your security and performance thresholds.

> | Parameter                  | Required | Default               | Description                                                                                   |

Reviewer 2: Are any of these parameters required? if not, there's no need to have the column

    2. **Only `string` values are supported**. We will raise `DataMaskingUnsupportedTypeError` for non-string values.
    3. **Use non-sensitive data only**. When using KMS, encryption context is available as plaintext in AWS CloudTrail, unless you [intentionally disabled KMS events](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/kms/latest/developerguide/logging-using-cloudtrail.html#filtering-kms-events){target="_blank"}.

=== "getting_started_encryption_context.py"

    ```python hl_lines="26-28"
    --8<-- "examples/data_masking/src/getting_started_encryption_context.py"
    ```

    1. They must match on `decrypt()` otherwise the operation will fail with `DataMaskingContextMismatchError`.

=== "getting_started_decryption_context.py"

    ```python hl_lines="26-28"
    --8<-- "examples/data_masking/src/getting_started_decryption_context.py"
    ```

    1. They must match otherwise the operation will fail with `DataMaskingContextMismatchError`.

### Choosing parts of your data

!!! note "We support `JSON` data types only - see [data serialization for more details](#data-serialization-and-preservation)."

???+ note "Current limitations"

>     1. The `fields` parameter is currently only available to use with the `erase` method, with the potential for it to be added to the `encrypt` and `decrypt` methods in the future.

Reviewer 3: merge these two and make the `fields` note a single short sentence, please

> You can use the `fields` parameter with dot notation `.` to choose one or more parts of your data to `erase`. This is useful when you want to keep data structure intact except the confidential fields.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can use the `fields` parameter with the dot notation `.` to choose one or more parts of your data to `erase`. This is useful when you want to keep data structure intact except the confidential fields.
```

When `fields` is present, `erase` behaves differently:

> | Operation | Behavior                                                    | Example                 | Obfuscated                      |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| Operation | Behavior                                                    | Example                 | Result                      |
```

Now that we changed to `erase`, `obfuscated` could give the impression is can be recovered. Different from `encrypt` we had earlier.

        ```json hl_lines="6-7"
        --8<-- "examples/data_masking/src/choosing_payload_multiple_keys.json"
        ```

    === "Result"

        ```json hl_lines="6-7"
        --8<-- "examples/data_masking/src/choosing_payload_multiple_keys_output.json"
        ```

=== "All key items"

    You want to obfuscate data under `address` field.

    === "Data"

        > Expression: `data_masker.erase(data, fields=["address"])`

        ```json hl_lines="6-17"
        --8<-- "examples/data_masking/src/choosing_payload_all_nested_keys.json"
        ```

    === "Result"

        ```json hl_lines="6-7"
        --8<-- "examples/data_masking/src/choosing_payload_all_nested_keys_output.json"
        ```

=== "Complex nested key"

    You want to obfuscate data under `name` field.

    === "Data"

        > Expression: `data_masker.erase(data, fields=["category..name"])`

        ```json hl_lines="6"
        --8<-- "examples/data_masking/src/choosing_payload_complex_nested_keys.json"
        ```

    === "Result"

        ```json hl_lines="6"
        --8<-- "examples/data_masking/src/choosing_payload_complex_nested_keys_output.json"
        ```

> === "All fields in a list"
> 
>     You want to obfuscate data under `street` field located at the any index of the address list.
> 
>     === "Data"
> 
>         > Expression: `data_masker.erase(data, fields=["address[*].street"])`
> 
>         ```json hl_lines="8 12"
>         --8<-- "examples/data_masking/src/choosing_payload_list_all_index.json"
>         ```
> 
>     === "Result"
> 
>         ```json hl_lines="8 12"
>         --8<-- "examples/data_masking/src/choosing_payload_list_all_index_output.json"
>         ```
> 
> === "Slicing a list"
> 
>     You want to obfuscate data by slicing a list.
> 
>     === "Data"
> 
>         > Expression: `data_masker.erase(data, fields=["address[-1].street"])`
> 
>         ```json hl_lines="16"
>         --8<-- "examples/data_masking/src/choosing_payload_list_slice.json"
>         ```
> 
>     === "Result"
> 
>         ```json hl_lines="16"
>         --8<-- "examples/data_masking/src/choosing_payload_list_slice_output.json"
>         ```
> 
> === "Complex expressions"
> 
>     You want to obfuscate data by finding for a field with conditional expression.
> 
>     === "Data"
> 
>         > Expression: `data_masker.erase(data, fields=["$.address[?(@.postcode > 12000)]"])`
> 
>         > `$`: Represents the root of the JSON structure.
> 
>         > `.address`: Selects the "address" property within the JSON structure.
> 
>         > `(@.postcode > 12000)`: Specifies the condition that elements should meet. It selects elements where the value of the `postcode` property is `greater than 12000`.
> 
>         ```json hl_lines="8 12"
>         --8<-- "examples/data_masking/src/choosing_payload_complex_search.json"
>         ```
> 
>     === "Result"
> 
>         ```json hl_lines="8 12"
>         --8<-- "examples/data_masking/src/choosing_payload_complex_search_output.json"
>         ```
> For comprehensive guidance on using JSONPath syntax, please refer to the official documentation available at [jsonpath-ng](https://github.com/h2non/jsonpath-ng#jsonpath-syntax){target="_blank" rel="nofollow"}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    You want to erase data in the `card_number` field.

    === "Data"

        > Expression: `data_masker.erase(data, fields=["card_number"])`

        ```json hl_lines="4"
        --8<-- "examples/data_masking/src/choosing_payload_top_keys.json"
        ```

    === "Result"

        ```json hl_lines="4"
        --8<-- "examples/data_masking/src/choosing_payload_top_keys_output.json"
        ```

=== "Nested key"

    You want to erase data in the `postcode` field.

    === "Data"

        > Expression: `data_masker.erase(data, fields=["address.postcode"])`

        ```json hl_lines="6"
        --8<-- "examples/data_masking/src/choosing_payload_nested_key.json"
        ```

    === "Result"

        ```json hl_lines="6"
        --8<-- "examples/data_masking/src/choosing_payload_nested_key_output.json"
        ```

=== "Multiple keys"

    You want to erase data in both `postcode` and `street` fields.

    === "Data"

        > Expression: `data_masker.erase(data, fields=["address.postcode", "address.street"])`

        ```json hl_lines="6-7"
        --8<-- "examples/data_masking/src/choosing_payload_multiple_keys.json"
        ```

    === "Result"

        ```json hl_lines="6-7"
        --8<-- "examples/data_masking/src/choosing_payload_multiple_keys_output.json"
        ```

=== "All key items"

    You want to erase data under `address` field.

    === "Data"

        > Expression: `data_masker.erase(data, fields=["address"])`

        ```json hl_lines="6-17"
        --8<-- "examples/data_masking/src/choosing_payload_all_nested_keys.json"
        ```

    === "Result"

        ```json hl_lines="6-7"
        --8<-- "examples/data_masking/src/choosing_payload_all_nested_keys_output.json"
        ```

=== "Complex nested key"

    You want to erase data under `name` field.

    === "Data"

        > Expression: `data_masker.erase(data, fields=["category..name"])`

        ```json hl_lines="6"
        --8<-- "examples/data_masking/src/choosing_payload_complex_nested_keys.json"
        ```

    === "Result"

        ```json hl_lines="6"
        --8<-- "examples/data_masking/src/choosing_payload_complex_nested_keys_output.json"
        ```

=== "All fields in a list"

    You want to erase data under `street` field located at the any index of the address list.

    === "Data"

        > Expression: `data_masker.erase(data, fields=["address[*].street"])`

        ```json hl_lines="8 12"
        --8<-- "examples/data_masking/src/choosing_payload_list_all_index.json"
        ```

    === "Result"

        ```json hl_lines="8 12"
        --8<-- "examples/data_masking/src/choosing_payload_list_all_index_output.json"
        ```

=== "Slicing a list"

    You want to erase data by slicing a list.

    === "Data"

        > Expression: `data_masker.erase(data, fields=["address[-1].street"])`

        ```json hl_lines="16"
        --8<-- "examples/data_masking/src/choosing_payload_list_slice.json"
        ```

    === "Result"

        ```json hl_lines="16"
        --8<-- "examples/data_masking/src/choosing_payload_list_slice_output.json"
        ```

=== "Complex expressions"

    You want to erase data by finding for a field with conditional expression.

    === "Data"

        > Expression: `data_masker.erase(data, fields=["$.address[?(@.postcode > 12000)]"])`

        > `$`: Represents the root of the JSON structure.

        > `.address`: Selects the "address" property within the JSON structure.

        > `(@.postcode > 12000)`: Specifies the condition that elements should meet. It selects elements where the value of the `postcode` property is `greater than 12000`.

        ```json hl_lines="8 12"
        --8<-- "examples/data_masking/src/choosing_payload_complex_search.json"
        ```

    === "Result"

        ```json hl_lines="8 12"
        --8<-- "examples/data_masking/src/choosing_payload_complex_search_output.json"
        ```

For comprehensive guidance on using JSONPath syntax, please refer to the official documentation available at [jsonpath-ng](https://github.com/h2non/jsonpath-ng#jsonpath-syntax){target="_blank" rel="nofollow"}
```

replacing `obfuscate` with `erase`. Once `fields` is added back to encryption/decryption we can rollback to the use of `obfuscate` semantic.

#### JSON

We also support data in JSON string format as input. We automatically deserialize it, then handle each field operation as expected.

Note that the return will be a deserialized JSON and your desired fields updated.

=== "Data"

    Expression: `data_masker.erase(data, fields=["card_number", "address.postcode"])`

    ```json
    --8<-- "examples/data_masking/src/choosing_payload_simple_json.json"
    ```

=== "Result"

    ```json
    --8<-- "examples/data_masking/src/choosing_payload_simple_json_output.json"
    ```

## Advanced

### Data serialization

???+ note "Current limitations"
    1. Python classes, `Dataclasses`, and `Pydantic models` are not supported yet.

Before we traverse the data structure, we perform two important operations on input data:

1. If `JSON string`, **deserialize** using default or provided deserializer.
2. If `dictionary`, **normalize** into `JSON` to prevent traversing unsupported data types.

When decrypting, we revert the operation to restore the original data structure.

For compatibility or performance, you can optionally pass your own JSON serializer and deserializer to replace `json.dumps` and `json.loads` respectively:

> === "advanced_custom_serializer.py"
> 
>     ```python hl_lines="17-18"
>     --8<-- "examples/data_masking/src/advanced_custom_serializer.py"
>     ```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```python hl_lines="17-18" title="advanced_custom_serializer.py"
--8<-- "examples/data_masking/src/advanced_custom_serializer.py"
```
```

Single snippets don't need Tabs. Please double check if it renders as GitHub preview seems to be removing the closing backtick.

| -------------------------- | --------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **local_cache_capacity**   | `100`                 | The maximum number of entries that can be retained in the local cryptographic materials cache |
| **max_cache_age_seconds**  | `300`                 | The maximum time (in seconds) that a cache entry may be kept in the cache                     |
| **max_messages_encrypted** | `4294967296`          | The maximum number of messages that may be encrypted under a cache entry                      |
| **max_bytes_encrypted**    | `9223372036854775807` | The maximum number of bytes that may be encrypted under a cache entry                         |

**Changing the default algorithm**

The AWS Encryption SDK defaults to using the `AES_256_GCM_HKDF_SHA512_COMMIT_KEY_ECDSA_P384` algorithm for encrypting your Data Key. If you want, you have the flexibility to customize and choose a different encryption algorithm.

=== "changing_default_algorithm.py"

    ```python hl_lines="5 26"
    --8<-- "examples/data_masking/src/changing_default_algorithm.py"

>     ```

Reviewer 3: For completion, we need to explain how to override `EncryptionSDKClient` options (algorithm is one of them).

suggestion: rename to `Passing additional SDK arguments`, and keep the `algorithm` as one of the arguments they can use via `provider_options`.

<img width="1021" alt="image" src="https://github.com/aws-powertools/powertools-lambda-python/assets/3340292/53c13d24-0ab3-4bc1-83cd-1d78fd697182">

### Masking data

!!! note "You can mask data without [installing any dependency](#install)."

> Masking will erase the original data and replace with `*****`. This means you cannot recover masked data, and its type will change to `str`.

Author: Should we add here that the type will change to `str` unless the data to be masked is of an Iterable type like `list`, `tuple`, or `set`, in which case it will return a new object of the same type as the input data but with each element replaced by the string `*****`?

Reviewer 3: Great catch! I was gonna add that to the `Fields` piece, but you're 100% right.. one might not reach that section and take it for granted.

We need to encapsulate that into the static typing return too.

Reviewer 3: <img width="750" alt="image" src="https://github.com/aws-powertools/powertools-lambda-python/assets/3340292/ff01c01f-9a53-41af-8f5b-e704c34a7edd">

### Choosing parts of your data

???+ note "Current limitations"

>     1. The `fields` parameter is currently exclusive to the `erase` method, with potential future inclusion into `encrypt` and `decrypt`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    1. The `fields` parameter is not yet supported in `encrypt` and `decrypt` operations.
```

>     2. We support `JSON` data types only - see [data serialization for more details](#data-serialization)."

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    2. We support `JSON` data types only - see [data serialization for more details](#data-serialization).
```

> === "advanced_custom_serializer.py"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

> ```python hl_lines="17-18"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```python hl_lines="17-18" title="advanced_custom_serializer.py"
```

Same as before but without tabbed content (single example).

| **max_messages_encrypted** | `4294967296`          | The maximum number of messages that may be encrypted under a cache entry                      |
| **max_bytes_encrypted**    | `9223372036854775807` | The maximum number of bytes that may be encrypted under a cache entry                         |

> If required, you have the option to customize the default values when initializing the `AWSEncryptionSDKProvider` class.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If required, you can customize the default values when initializing the `AWSEncryptionSDKProvider` class.
```

`You have the option to` becomes `You can`

You could go even further in the future when shorter length is necessary by using synonyms, for example.

`You have the option to customize` becomes `You can change`

> === "aws_encryption_provider_example.py"
> 
> ```python hl_lines="14-19"
> --8<-- "examples/data_masking/src/aws_encryption_provider_example.py"
> ```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```python hl_lines="14-19" title=""aws_encryption_provider_example.py""
--8<-- "examples/data_masking/src/aws_encryption_provider_example.py"
```
```

Removing tab, keeping a single snippet with title for consistency.

> **Passing additional SDK arguments**

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
##### Passing additional SDK arguments
```

changing to heading so customers can use deep linking in their content, etc. It's not the best visual but what we've got for deep linking in this case.

> You can pass additional arguments to the `AWSEncryptionSDKProvider` via the `provider_options` parameter. To learn more about the different arguments you can give to the SDK, see the [EncryptionSDKClient's documentation](https://aws-encryption-sdk-python.readthedocs.io/en/latest/generated/aws_encryption_sdk.html#aws_encryption_sdk.EncryptionSDKClient.encrypt){target="_blank"}.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
!!! note "See the [AWS Encryption SDK docs for more details](https://aws-encryption-sdk-python.readthedocs.io/en/latest/generated/aws_encryption_sdk.html#aws_encryption_sdk.EncryptionSDKClient.encrypt){target="_blank"}"

As an escape hatch mechanism, you can pass additional arguments to the `AWSEncryptionSDKProvider` via the `provider_options` parameter.
```

We can shorten the message by using a visual cue and decouple our sentence vs an action - a `note` :)

Reviewer 3: **BEFORE**

<img width="1175" alt="image" src="https://github.com/aws-powertools/powertools-lambda-python/assets/3340292/a0913282-6882-4b92-a944-53f655e09600">

**AFTER**

<img width="1165" alt="image" src="https://github.com/aws-powertools/powertools-lambda-python/assets/3340292/d048d3fd-e50c-4594-9d5f-5e8aa8f24e15">

For example, the AWS Encryption SDK defaults to using the `AES_256_GCM_HKDF_SHA512_COMMIT_KEY_ECDSA_P384` algorithm for encrypting your Data Key. If you want, you have the flexibility to customize and choose a different encryption algorithm.

> === "changing_default_algorithm.py"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

> ```python hl_lines="5 26 30"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```python hl_lines="5 26 30" title="changing_default_algorithm.py"
```

--8<-- "examples/data_masking/src/changing_default_algorithm.py"
```

> **Using multiple keys**

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
##### Using multiple keys
```

> The `AWSEncryptionSDKProvider` allows you to instantiate it with several KMS keys by passing them all in a `list` to the `keys` parameter. This could be beneficial if you own keys in different regions, enabling you to perform cross-regional encryption and decryption.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can use multiple KMS keys from more than one AWS account for higher availability, when instantiating `AWSEncryptionSDKProvider`.
```

You can shorten it by using active voice. A minor fix is that they can't use multi-region yet, because we are not exposing the MRK class yet.

> === "using_multiple_keys.py"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

> ```python hl_lines="15"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```python hl_lines="15" title="using_multiple_keys.py"
```
